When you contacted seismic studies prior to World
War II in terms of work, has the equipment changed a
great deal since then, would you say? Or has it
remained rather constant? No, there's been great
improvements to equipment, largely due to the oil
companies.
The refraction seismic technique, I don't think I
need to explain what it's all about, is much the
same. But the refraction technique has become
extremely sophisticated from the point of view of
data processing. You now have hundreds of
instruments out and combine them in quite subtle
ways, combine the signals in quite subtle ways.
This, of course, is caused partly by the
extraordinary change in electronics. You see,
one of the striking things in my life that has
affected science so greatly is the change in
electronics. There have been three major
changes. When I was a young man, electronics
worked with vacuum tubes, and this went on right up
to something like 1950. No, later than that,
almost 55 or 56, the vacuum tube was king, and
everything had vacuum tubes in it. They were
large, they were unreliable, they broke, they
were an absolute pest, and I remember there was a
joke saying there's nothing wrong with
electronics which couldn't be cured by getting
rid of the vacuum tube, which was, of course, the
only electronic component, practically. Well,
then the invention of the transistor made a
difference. And I remember very well making the
decision in my own lab that in future we would use
transistors unless there was some reason to the
contrary to use valves, that our standard would be
to use transistors. Well, in about a couple of
years, you could buy... little packages
containing perhaps half a dozen transistors and
doing some function like some logical function or
a counting function or something of this kind.
Well then we made another decision. We decided we
wouldn't solder together our own transistors.
We'd buy the little package units unless there was
some reason to the contrary. Well that lasted some
years and then suddenly we got integrated
circuits and we got things a few millimeters
across which would do these functions. So you had
the three the four things, the three transitions,
in this very short time, really, since the late
50s. And this is the thing that's made all the
difference. It's the same thing, of course,
that's produced the pocket computers, things you
couldn't conceive of doing. You can be much more
fancy in your data analysis. You've probably
heard about Walter Monk's ocean-bottom
capsules. These are all dependent on this kind of
thing. And all through science, it's may be
possible to do things that you really couldn't
have done before. And seismic reflection
shooting is one of the critical things.
Would you describe your instrument for measuring
heat values? Would I describe it? Yes. Well, it's
all in the literature, of course, but I'll
certainly describe it. It was a tube about 10 feet
long, a little over an inch in diameter, which
contained the original apparatus you want, the
one we started with. The first one we had, the
temperature measurements were made by
thermocouples. We had copper constant and
thermocouples in it, and we measured the
temperature difference between the bottom of the
tube and the top of the tube, and the middle of the
tube and the top of the tube, so that we got two
temperature differences. the wires from these
thermocouples ran into a pressure-tight
container at the top, fastened onto the top of the
tube, and the whole thing was lowered down into the
sea on a wire, and when it got near the bottom, we
arranged for it to be dropped and to go rapidly,
shoot down into the bottom, and this tube
penetrated in 10 feet or 15 feet, whatever its
length was. You left it there for half an hour and
then pulled it out again. This I developed here in
La Jolla in the summer of 1949 with Art Maxwell, who
was a graduate student. And you built this in the
lab? I built it myself in the scripts workshops
with my own hands and Maxwell's hands. And so you in
effect knew about what you wanted. Was there any
other temperature measuring device which gave
you clues on how to build it? First of all, at one
point I think we got wrong. I thought of this before
the war, but we actually did it after the war in
1949. I think you asked me the question in terms of
what we did before the war. I measured heat flow on
land in England and South Africa before the war. I
had the idea of measuring it at sea before the war,
but I didn't actually get it done until after the
war. And this apparatus This first one we built
here never actually worked. It was clearly
possible there were trivial things wrong with it,
and Art Maxwell built a thing with a rather
different recording arrangement, and I built one
like the original one in England, and they both
worked. Sorry, you asked me a question. No, you've
answered it. I was wondering where you got the
idea. The answer is I suppose... Oh, no, let me say a
little more about it. Just before we did the job
here, a man, Norwegian, whose name escapes me,
I'll remember it in a minute, had the same idea
independently, and he was a Dane. The Danes had a
round-the-world trip, oceanographic, ocean
floor trip, just in the early, middle 50s.
I think it was the early 50s, I think, and he
actually used this apparatus, I think, before we
got ours to work. He didn't get any results. He got
some temperature differences, but what they,
undoubtedly, they were due to friction on pushing
the thing in. When the spike goes in, it rubs on the
sediments and warms itself up, and you have to
leave it in for something like half an hour on the
sizes we had. to settle down. Otherwise, you get
two or three times too high a value. And he got
absurd. Well, some of the results were reasonable
and some of them were absurd. And I think no one has,
they've never been quoted again. And I think they
were beyond question wrong. But he has, in a sense,
the priority on it. And I'm only sorry I can't
remember his name. He's a well-known Danish
oceanographer who went on this round-the-world
trip, mostly collecting sediments. Afterwards,
Maxwell and various people made smaller versions
of it in which you don't have to leave it quite so
long. You can leave it for 10 minutes instead of
half an hour, and this is quite a help. Of course,
the ship always pulled my apparatus and bent the
probe, so I always, every time, I had to straighten
it. When you went to Toronto, did you have any
innovations in mind as far as changing the nature
of the department or the faculty there? Well, I
didn't know much about it, of course, when I went.
I'd never been there, and so I could hardly go with
much idea. I went with a certain apprehension
because there was a geophysical section there run
by Jock Wilson, J. Tuzo Wilson, who was a very old
friend of mine, and I thought he might feel that to
have another geophysicist come in as head of the
department was, in a sense, detrimental to him,
but he was extremely good about it. And the thing,
one of the things I was interested in was
boosting up this project. It was a very, rather
small project, and I was only there for two years.
We did expand it quite a bit. And, I mean, I'd left
pure physics 10 years, 20 years before nearly, and
it... was obviously a thing I had to feel my way with
a bit to take over, take charge of a very large
physics department. There were interesting
things going there. They were doing work on
developing the electron microscope. They were
doing work on spectroscopy, which I didn't know
much about. Some low temperature work. There were
quite nice things going on there. Then I got very
interested in the setting up of a computer center
there. I mean, 49 was early days for this. And we set
up one of the first of the things that all
universities now have, a computer center. So I had
an interesting time there. What about at
Admiralty when you were in operational research
there? Did you try to bring any new ideas into
Admiralty? Well, what we were interested in doing
was examining, we regarded operations analysis
as the examination of past operations to
understand what happened and why, and to use this
information in the planning of future
operations. The critical, probably the most
important project in that group, this group was
run by Patrick Blackett, the most important
project, I think, was the arguments about the size
of convoys.
a considerable split in the Navy about the proper
size for convoys. I mean, on the obvious
difficulty, if a convoy is very large, it's
conspicuous, and you may lose a lot of ships if it's
attacked. If a convoy is very small, it'll have to
have rather few defensive vessels, rather few
escort vessels, because there'll be more convoys
to divide the escort vessels between. Where does
the balance come? How fast does a ship have to be not
to go in convoy at all? These kinds of questions,
fascinating questions. I didn't have very much to
do with this. I knew all about it, and I talked about
it continuously. But Blackett and some other
people, Henry Hume particularly, did most of
this. My own main interest, I think, I was
interested in arguments about the use of air
power. whether we should use it on flying bombs,
whether one should divert aircraft from the
bombing of Germany to coastal command. This has
all been published now, this great controversy
about the use of air power, how far it was desirable
to use aeroplanes to knock down German housing,
and how far it was better to concentrate on
particular objectives. And I spent a lot of time on
intelligence connection with this. And then, as I
told you yesterday, I was very interested in, very
much concerned with the German development of the
V weapons, the flying bombs and the rockets, and
getting an understanding of what was likely to
happen, what ought to be done about it. A very
important question, of course, because these
things were very embarrassingly likely to arrive
just before the invasion of France. And we didn't
quite know how the British public would react. It
obviously depended on the intensity of the attack
on London, whether they would demand that they be
defended from this, and we'd have to cut down the
effort in France. I mean, it was extremely
important to understand what was likely to
happen. And in fact, we managed, by destroying the
sites, to postpone the attack until after the
landings in France. We were lucky that way, I
think. Because there was a great argument as to
whether it was necessary to land in France. The Air
Force believed, for emotional reasons, that if
you knocked down 30% of all the houses in Germany,
you would, in fact, end the war. This turned out not
to be true, but a really terrible thing,
deliberately to go out and use air power to destroy
housing and kill civilians. It's one of the great
war crimes, of course, by anything but our current
standards. I mean, by any standards of war from the
17th century to now, it is a war crime. But, of
course, things have now changed so much, and the
attack on civilians, the killing of civilians,
and the destruction of their houses is now an
accepted part of war. But the thing about it that I
felt very strongly at the time
Now, to begin today then with fresh questions,
from the last time we talked, you had in effect
resigned at Toronto and were taking a new
direction in your career. Well, I came home and I
became the bottom man on the totem pole. An
eccentric thing to do. I thought at the time I
wanted peace and quiet to get on with my own work. A
great many scientists, particularly scientists
who had the experience of the war, have oscillated
between a desire for power and influence and a
desire to do their own work. The outstanding
example was the treasurer of the National
Academy, Bob Robertson. Bob Robertson was an
expert on relativity. And Bob Robertson came over
during the war, and I remember telling him, But
there was no good coming over and talking about new
gadgets he wanted made and all this kind of thing. I
said, just wasting your time. The war's nearly
over. The only thing that matters is to use what
we've got and get on with it. And I don't want to talk
about whether you can make a better death charge.
I'm just not interested. And he got this point and
became an enthusiastic supporter of operations
analysis. A very successful, very influential
man. talking all the time about how he wanted to get
back to his relativity at Caltech. Well, the war
ended. He went back to relativity at Caltech.
Before a year or so was over, he was saying he felt it
wasn't relevant. He felt he ought to be doing
something useful. Morphy went and became chief
scientist to NATO, I believe. And this cycle was
repeated several times until eventually he got
killed in a road crash. But this is true of many
people, this oscillation between positions of
moderate power and influence and positions in
which you can just deal with graduate students and
try and teach people what the world is like and how
things work and get on with the things you're
interested in. Well this was one of these switches
that I decided I could have had various jobs. I was
offered the directorship of the atomic weapons
establishment in England at the same time and I
refused it. I could have done almost anything I'd
wanted to do. At the end of the war, I was offered the
job of Chief Scientist of the Air Force. Many, many
jobs. There was always this choice, and to some
extent, the oscillation between the two things.
Well, anyway, I went back to Cambridge, and this
has been a success. Somewhere in one of C.P. Snow's
novels, he has a case of this sort, and says that
he's noticed how often it is successful where
people like Charles V of Spain, resigning as
emperor and going into a monastery. Snow doesn't
quote this, but it's another example. It's a
common human thing to do, and I'm sure when Snow
wrote this, he was thinking of me, because we
talked about it not very long before. Well,
anyway, I went back to Cambridge to this job, as
assistant director of research with this man,
Brown, who was a lot younger than me and I'd worked
with as a young man, and he was head of the
department. And I had to, of course, be frankly
careful not to tread on his toes or to attempt to run
the department. I had to sit in the background and
let him do what he wanted to do, so to speak. I had
some difficulty in refraining from getting the
department involved in the International
Geophysical Year. He wanted, for some reason best
known to himself, to have nothing at all to do with
the International Geophysical Year. I think he
just thought he'd be a nuisance. He was a rather
half-hearted geophysicist. He was an awfully
nice man, a very able man, but really fairly
half-hearted about actually doing any work. He
was, I think, a country gentleman at heart,
really. And he died of cancer. or about ten years
ago, I suppose. But before that, he decided to
resign as head of the department. And so I became
head of the department. And at this time, or about
that time, or a little before, the university had
promoted me to my old grade as reader.
So we both were readers, and I took the job as head of
the department. And we were, by that time, in quite
a mess. And I went into it with this man called
Morris Hill, who had been a graduate student with
me after the war, and I'd known him during the war.
He was the son of A.V. Hill, the Secretary of the
Royal Society, the physiologist, the man who was
in charge of this committee looking into
scientific manpower that I mentioned yesterday.
Well, his son was in the lab, and he was getting very
depressed and upset, and I had a long talk with him.
And I decided that what we lacked was money. So I
said, well, why don't I get some money? So we got a
lot of money. We got $50,000 a year from the Office
of Naval Research, which was reasonable. It was my
appreciable money in those days, it isn't now. And
we got money from here and there. And soon we were
really quite well set up. And we went into the
marine work, marine geology, on quite a scale. We
had an extensive operation in the Indian Ocean. um
during there was an international um i forget what
it's called the international indian ocean
expedition there are lots of different
nationalities sent ships to the indian ocean i
didn't go but a lot of our people went well so that
when i became head of the department again i went
through a moderate expansion looking back i
didn't expand it enough i decided that I wanted to
aim at 20 graduate students. So we went up to 20
graduate students and a staff of about five. We
didn't get any appreciable increase of money from
the university, but we simply, in fact, the
university money was practically negligible. It
paid my salary and a couple of other salaries and
nothing much else. And I got the money from all
kinds of places outside. And then, a little later
on, I saw the writing on the wall that this country
wasn't going on indefinitely financing Europe,
scientific enterprises in Europe. And when our
contract with ONR ran out, I decided not to try and
get it renewed. I was sure it was going to go, and I
wouldn't get it renewed, and so I decided to use the
fact that this wasn't being renewed to put
pressure to get money from the British
government. So we got quite good contracts,
grants rather, with the old Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research in England
and its various successors, the Natural
Environment Research Council. They've been our
main finance since that. And we've been
adequately financed for the level we were working
at. I think, looking back, we ought to have aimed at
a 50% higher level. But we didn't really do it. But
we've had very distinguished people. numerous
fellows of the Royal Society, and we had played a
very large part in the revolution in geology, the
transition from the idea of fixed continents, no
global theory, to the ideas of Wegener and the
ideas that you could have a global theory of why the
Earth worked like it did. Our main theme since I
went back there in, I went back in 56 and I would say
the main theme of that department in Cambridge
since 58 has been a global view of geology,
particularly the mechanism of geology as
exemplified in the sea floor.
I should like to ask two questions right here if I
could. What finally became of the explanation of
low values you found in the Pacific, speaking of
heat values in the Pacific floor? Did we find those
values? Yes, you did. Well, they were very
variable. I mean, there are very high values along
the ocean ridge. Right. And there are lower values
on each side, some of which are exceptionally low.
And the general decrease of heat flow away from the
ridge is qualitatively well explained by the
ideas of the motion of the sea floor away from the
axis. It's a somewhat curious situation at the
moment. One gets a very good account of the slope
from the ridge down on each side. I mean, it's a very
striking feature of the sea floor that the deepest
places are quite close to the continental edge and
the shallowest places are in the middle. I mean,
this is not what anyone would expect of an ocean.
And the reason is because new ocean floor is being
formed, all hot, by volcanoes on the ridge and
these volcanoes keep erupting and it keeps
splitting open and you're forming new sea floor on
the axis of the ridge and the sea floor on each side
is moving away and as it goes of course it cools and
contracts and the increased depth of the sea is
very well accounted for quantitatively by the
cooling. The heat flow is not so good
quantitatively. Various people, mostly
students of mine, are working on this now, and I was
talking to Dan McKenzie, who's the brightest man
on this stuff, and he tells me there's a man at MIT,
an old student of ours, who now has a rational
explanation of this, but I'm afraid I can't
remember what it is. But you began working with
that, though, with these ideas really in the 50s
while you were... Well, what I wanted to do, you
see, I was fairly convinced that the Earth's heat
was the ultimate cause of geological change, that
the Earth is a heat engine. And the question of
whether the Earth is cooling, whether the Earth is
heating up, how the heat flow varies from place to
place, was obviously one of the critical things
about the Earth, which wasn't understood, wasn't
known, hardly. You see, the increase of
temperature in mines was, as far as I know,
discovered in the middle of the 17th century. You
would think that it would have been known to
Agricola in the 16th century, and whilst I haven't
read Agricola's enormous works in Latin all the
way through, I have made a fair search, and it
appears that he doesn't know that it's hot in
mines. Very surprising, and I don't understand
why, and I want to read some of his obscurer works to
see whether he really did know, but those are
French
Jesuit theologian, astrologer, scientist of a
sort in the beginning, somewhere about 1620, the
beginning of the 17th century, who remarks that
the mines in what's now Czechoslovakia and
Bohemia are hot in them. And there's a beautiful,
very interesting travel book by Edward Brown, the
son of Brown, who wrote the essays. Brown, what's
his name? Doesn't really matter. Well-known 17th
century essayist who lived in Norwich, England.
Well, his son was a doctor who went out to the mines
in Bohemia and gives a very good account of how it
gets warm as you go down them. And Boyle, he was a
friend of Boyle's, Robert Boyle's, whose joke
about Boyle that he was the father of chemistry and
the nephew of the Earl of Cork. Well, anyway, he
wrote about the heat inside the Earth. And then
really no one paid any attention to it. There's
extraordinarily few references to it from these
very interesting papers of Boyle in about 1660,
way down until our own times. And then Kelvin got
interested. Kelvin was interested in it in
connection with the age of the Earth. There's a
very interesting book that's been published by
Joe Birchfield, who you may know. Joe Birchfield
of Northern Illinois, I think. He wrote a book on
Kelvin and the age of the Earth. I've written a
review of it, which I will give you. And Kelvin set
up a committee, a committee of the British
Association, to measure heat flow from the Earth.
You have to measure not only temperature
gradients, which is relatively easy, but also the
thermal conductivity of the rocks. And this
committee was very active for 10 or 15 years. And
then again, the subject died and nothing happened
until Jeffreys suggested to me in the middle 1930s
that we ought to do something about it. And we
started to do something about it. We developed
methods of measuring thermal conductivity of
relatively small pieces of rock, methods of
making the specimens, all this kind of thing. And I
went to South Africa and worked the western
temperature measurements in boreholes and mines
there, and I collected specimens and measured
thermal conductivity and so on. And I had students
working in England on it, or one student anyway.
And so we got well into heat flow on land before the
war, and then after the war decided to do it at sea.
We had to take cores and measure the thermal
conductivity of the material. Afterwards,
Morris Ewing at Columbia developed a method in
which you measured the temperatures and took the
cores at the same time. And this was one of the new
inputs to the whole argument about what's been
happening on Earth. The critical things, I think,
for the revolution in geological thought were,
historically, first of all, Wegener, who before
the first war, had very good arguments for the idea
that the continents had split and moved apart.
Wegener lost out, I think, for two reasons. There
was tremendous controversy in the 20s about this,
very offensive papers about Wegener. And he lost
out for two reasons. One, he wasn't a member of the
right trades union. He was a meteorologist, not a
geologist. Secondly, he mixed up good arguments
with bad. And if you have a difficult case to argue,
you want to argue on your strong arguments.
Because otherwise people will refute the weak
ones and think they refuted the whole thing.